Optimization problems with integer
variables are very difficult to solve.
In the last video, you learned how to
formulate a problem with binary variables.
The mathematical formulation looks
very similar to the formulation
of problems with continuous variables.
While the formulations might look similar,
the solution methods are very different.
If the models are as small as the ones we
have been using in this course then you
are not going to notice the difference
between solving models with continuous
variables and
models with integer variables.
They're both going to solve fairly fast.
The problem starts when you're
trying to solve larger models.
The techniques for solving problems
with continuous variables are such that
they can tackle very large models.
The same cannot be said about solution
methods for models with integer variables.
This is why researchers have developed
alternative methodologies to
deal with integer problems.
These methodologies are capable of
finding very good solutions but
they cannot guarantee for
these solutions to be optimal.
The solution procedures based on these
methodologies are designed to search for
improved solutions, however,
at some point they give up.
And they return the best
solution that they find,
the best solution that they found
could be optimal, but we don't know.
These methodologies are known
as Metaheuristics, and
the solutions that they find
are known as heuristic solutions.
Metaheuristics provide great flexibility.
The modeling of the problem is
not limited to linear functions.
An Excel model to be solved with
Metaheuristics can have anything you want.
For example, nonlinear functions, such
as logarithmic or exponential functions.
Non-smooth functions,
such as IF or LOOKUP functions.
Let's take a look at an example.
Market basket analysis is a technique
to generate practical rules.
That the store can apply in order to
maximize its cross-selling opportunities.
The objective of the analysis is
to establish rules that state if
x is purchased,
then y is also likely to be purchased.
The analyses also produces
statistical evidence that the rules
are the result of some systematic
behavior and not just pure chance.
To measure the strength of
the relationship between two items,
market basket analysis uses the so
called Lift Ratio.
If we have items x and
y then the Lift Ratio tells us
how much more likely it is for
item y to be purchased given
that item x has been purchased.
For example, a Lift Ratio of
two tells us that the moment
x is purchased then the probability
that y is also purchased doubles.
A common assumption is that maximizing
cross-selling opportunities is equivalent
to maximizing the total lift ratios of
products that are close to each other.
Proximity depends on the context,
in e-commerce proximity means showing
related products on a web page.
For example,
proximity is to show an ad for
a toner cartridge on a web page
that advertises a laser printer.
In physical spaces,
proximity is achieved by placing
related products near each other.
Let's see how Heuristic Optimization
can help with this problem.
Assume that a market basket analysis for
a chain of grocery stores
produces the Lift Ratios for six
product categories shown in this table.
The store will like to figure out
the optimal placement of the products
in order to maximize the total lift ratio
of product categories that
are close to each other.
The lift of a location is a sum of for
the lift ratios for
the immediately adjacent locations.
In this example the lift for Produce is
the sum of the lift ratios of Produce and
Dairy, Produce and Meat, and
Produce and Soft Drinks.
Let's take a look at the special mold for
this problem.
Locate and open the Excel file
Store Layout Optimization.
There are three tables
in this spreadsheet.
The first one contains the Lift Ratios
produced by the market basket analysis.
The second table contains
the decision variables.
The variables consist of
the index of the product category
that is placed in each
position of the Store Layout.
The placement shown here is arbitrary,
it follows the order of
the product categories.
We have 1, 2, and 3 in the first row,
and then 4, 5, and 6 in the second row.
The next table calculates the lift
values for each position in the layout.
For instance, product category 1, which
is Produce, is assigned to position A1.
The lift for position of A1 is the sum
of the Lift Ratios between Produce and
Dairy, which is assigned
to position A2 and
Produce and Soft Drinks,
which are assigned to position B1.
That is 1.2 plus 0.9, which equals 2.1.
Note that the model uses the INDEX
Function to calculate all the Lift values.
The use of this function
is not allowed in Linear or
into your programming formulations.
This is why we are not going to be able
the standard LP solver for this problem.
The Total lift is the sum
of all the lift values.
Click on the ASP tab to
access the Optimization Mode.
You can see that the objective
is to maximize the Total lift.
The variables are the product category
placements in the light
gold cells from C14 to E15.
ASP includes the all
different Constraints.
This constraint type is only
available in heuristic optimization.
It indicates that the values of
the decision variables must be integer and
all different.
This is exactly what we need for
this model.
The metaheuristic solver in ASP
is called evolutionary engine.
We can either click on the Engine tab and
choose Standard Evolutionary Engine
from the drop-down menu or
let ASP choose the engine automatically.
We're going to let ASP choose an engine.
Click on the Mall tab, and
then on the Play Button,
to start the optimization process.
ASP finds a solution, and
reports that the solver has converged.
Note, that this message is different from
me stating that the optimal solution has
been found.
ASP uses green as an indicator that it has
found and confirmed the optimal solution.
Click on the Output tab,
ASP runs a diagnosis to figure
out what engine to use.
During this process you found out that
the model includes a non-smooth operation,
the INDEX function.
The model is diagnosed as NSP,
non-smooth problem.
This is why ASP selected
the Standard Evolutionary Engine.
The rest of the output shows some
information about the search
that we're not going to discuss.
As you can see from this example,
metaheuristic optimization allows
you to develop very flexible models.
With this technology, we are not
restricted to linear functions or
to the three standard
types of constraints.
The application of metaheuristic
optimization to problems
in industry has increased
exponentially since the early 1990s.
Commercial software is available to
tackle large and complex problems.
The purpose of this video was to
introduce you to a technology that
represents one of the most advanced
forms of prescriptive analytics.